Ref: SSM-D-20-00623
Manuscript Title: The role of alcohol in the link between national football tournaments (soccer) and domestic abuse - evidence from England
Social Science & Medicine
Dear Miss Trendl,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to Social Science & Medicine (SSM). We have now completed its review; we apologize for the delay in processing your manuscript. Nonetheless, attach the comments of the reviewers, who we thank for their constructive comments. There is enough consensus among the reviewers to encourage a revision, although it is clear that it will take a significant amount of work. If you feel able to respond to these suggestions, we would be willing to consider a revised submission. Of course there is no guarantee that a revision will prove publishable. Please submit your revision through the on-line system by Aug 20, 2020.
If we have not heard from you by this date, then we will assume you do not wish to submit a revision and your manuscript will be withdrawn. If you feel you will need more time to revise and re-submit your paper, then please let us know immediately. Extensions to resubmission deadlines are only granted in exceptional circumstances.
To submit a revision, visit this webpage and click 'log in' at the top of the page. There you will see a menu item called "Submissions Needing Revision". You will find your submission record there. When submitting your revision, you will be asked to upload a Response to the reviewers' comments. Please also include a document that highlights the tracked changes made to your original submission.
If you do not wish to revise your submission please follow the instructions above to log in to your "Submissions Needing Revision" space where you will have the option to decline this invitation to revise.
We ask all our authors to consider the points below as a guide to submitting revised submissions:  
Required files
When submitting your revised paper, we ask that you include the following items:
    1. Response to Reviewers: A separate file labelled "Response to Reviewers" that carefully addresses, point-by-point, the issues raised in the comments appended below, including those of the Editorial Office, if any. You should also include a suitable rebuttal to any specific request for change that you have not made. Mention the page, paragraph, and line number of any revisions that are made. Please do not include any author identifying information in this file as it is viewed by reviewers.
    2. Manuscript and Figure Source Files: At revision stage, we cannot accommodate PDF files for production purposes. Figures and tables may be embedded within the main manuscript file as long as they are of sufficient resolution for Production. For any figure or table that cannot be embedded within the source file (such as *.PSD Photoshop files), the original figure needs to be uploaded separately. Please do not upload figures and tables both ways. Refer to the SSM Guide for Authors for additional information.
    3. Highlights: A short collection of bullet points that convey the core findings of the article and should be submitted as a separate file. Please use 'Highlights' in the file name and include 3 to 5 bullet points (maximum 85 characters, including spaces, per bullet point). See the following website for more information.
For additional details regarding acceptable file formats, please refer to the SSM Guide for Authors.
Further considerations for revised submissions:
    1. There must be NO author identifying information in the main text manuscript and supporting documents i.e., Response to Reviewers. Acknowledgements should be submitted as a separate file, which reviewers will not see.
    2. Keep in mind that standard SSM style when citing multiple citations is to do so alphabetically. For assistance on formatting references, please visit our Guide for Author’s page here.
    3. Please remember that the combined word length of your abstract, tables, and references as well as the main text of all resubmissions should remain within our word limit. Exceeding these limits should only occur with the Editor’s consent.
    4. Please remember that SSM does NOT publish endnotes or footnotes.
    5. When uploading new documents to replace old ones, please remove the old ones, as we already have these saved in our system.
    6. Please ensure your manuscript is double-spaced and each page is numbered. Line numbering will be automatically generated by the system.
With kind regards,
Lori A. J. Scott-Sheldon, PhD
Associate Editor
Social Science & Medicine


Reviewer #1: This study uses nearly a decade of police data to determine whether the prevalence of alcohol-involved domestic abuse is associated with football (soccer) matches, specifically whether England wins or loses. The authors find that there is a notable increase in the number of alcohol-involved domestic abuse on days when England wins football matches, and conduct several sensitivity analyses to check the robustness of their results. There is much to like about this article. I focus here on the potential limitations and suggestions to possibly improve it for publication.

Introduction
1. The authors may wish to consider the role of drinking patterns and intoxication in football and the prevalence and severity of domestic violence, especially considering that the hypothesized mechanism for why the game outcome would be associated with alcohol-involved domestic assault is related to drinking patterns.

Methods
2. If it is a reasonable number of codes, please list the crime codes included in the category of "domestic abuse." If these span more and less serious crimes, that may be important for readers to know.

3. Did the authors consider other potential confounders that would influence levels of alcohol consumption at football matches? For example, opponent rankings, temperature, and time of day have been shown to be important in some analyses of sports and intoxication or alcohol-related harms. Similarly, the authors include holidays (i.e., Christmas and New Year's Eve), did they consider adding major drinking holidays? If so, please briefly explain your model building process and/or why these confounders weren't retained.

4. Did the authors test for temporal clustering within the crime data to determine whether it was necessary to nest the observations within months and/or years?

5. Why did the authors choose to not use an offset (i.e., calculate a rate) or adjust for annual population?

6. A multiple testing correction is needed.

7. The authors make several statements toward establishing causality. One way to buttress these statements would be to adjust their regression coefficient for under-reporting if there are data to suggest the proportion of domestic assaults that are reported in England using quantitative bias analysis.

Results
8. There are methods described in the results section; these should appear in the methods section.

9. There are results for analyses and outcomes that are not described anywhere. Please describe these in the methods section.

Discussion
10. For the authors consideration: It may help readers grasp the significance of the findings to multiply your rate (0.53 per 100,000) by the population of WMP (2.9 million) to generate an approximate count of additional alcohol-involved domestic assaults?

11. The authors may also want to mention that it is a limitation that alcohol-involvement was subjective; there may be cases where alcohol was reported where it was not involved and vice versa, although the authors tried to mitigate this by incorporating data from the incidents.

12. Do the authors have a set of focused recommendations for how to reduce the odds of alcohol-involved domestic assault after football matches?

Overall, nice work!

Reviewer #2: General comment:
An interesting study, revealing that the experience of a national success in an international football tournament substantially increases the likelihood of alcohol-related violent behaviors manifesting in domestic (and other) settings.

Originality:
The study is original in the sense that it, to the best of my knowledge and in line with the authors' claim, for the first time explores the role alcohol plays in the link between football and domestic abuse in a large-scale quantitative research design.

International relevance:
The study is relevant since football is the most popular sport in the world and alcohol consumption and related problem is high in connection to games and tournaments. These problems are a public health concern and results in negative consequences both for the society as a whole, as well as for the individual and brings harms to others.

Significance of contribution:
The study makes an interesting contribution to the research field by showing a connection between football games, game outcome, and alcohol-related violence, specifically domestic abuse.

Is the manuscript likely to stimulate wider debate if published?
The manuscript is likely to stimulate a wider debate since football is the largest sport in the world with high levels of alcohol consumption and related problems. This has been a problem for decades and as a matter of fact during the last European championship in France 2016 sales of alcohol were banned as a consequence of a number of alcohol-related violent incidents. That football events also have consequences for alcohol-related domestic violence is also a matter that I believe should be interesting both for the research community as well as the public. A wide debate, however, probably depends on active work with the third mission.

Coverage of appropriate existing literature;
I note that there are 26 references, whereof 11 are not research papers. Since there is a body of research reporting on sporting events, alcohol consumption, and related problems (such as violence), there should be room to add more references. This would also help the paper in the sense of putting it into a larger context. For instance, there are papers reported that have demonstrated high levels of alcohol consumption at both football events (e.g., Durbeej et al. PlosOne, 2017) and other sporting events (e.g., Erickson et al. ACER, 2011; Glassman et al. J Alc Drug Edu, 2011). The paper would benefit from incorporating references to high levels of alcohol consumption at sporting events, in particular football.
In addition, I'm missing a discussion with regard to the implications of the study findings, specifically the implications to policy and prevention. There are a number of studies being conducted around the world attempting to reduce alcohol consumption and related problems at sporting events. The paper would benefit from referencing some of these studies, e.g., Kingsland et al. Syst Rev, 2016; Durbeej et al. BMC Publ Health, 2016; Elgán et al, ACER, 2018. That being said, the paper would benefit from highlighting where alcohol is consumed, i.e., in the home setting, pubs and bars, and the sport arena setting, and these are all potential settings for prevention that in the end should decrease different types of alcohol-related violence, including domestic violence.

(if applicable) adequacy of methodology, analysis and interpretation:
The chosen statistical methods used in the current study seems appropriate given the research question and data.
The causal chain of events proposed by the authors is that the game outcome predicts the level of alcohol consumption, which in turn affects violence. However, this study, for obvious reasons, has no information about the level of alcohol consumption or intoxication levels, which then is a limitation.
I think that it is interesting that the obtained results stand in contrast to those obtained in the American study were loss of the local National Football League (NFL) team resulted in a 10% increase in the rate of reported male to female intimate partner violence. A somewhat elaborated discussion of this circumstance would make an interesting contribution in the discussion section.
The significance levels are reported as thresholds, however, I think it would be more valuable to the reader if exact p-values are reported.

Clear, concise and jargon-free writing style:
The manuscript should benefit from a more clear structure, see below.

Structure and organization:
In what way are the results from this study relevant from a social or public health perspective?
The hypothesis of the study could be more clearly expressed in the introduction. On page 3 it says: "To test our hypothesis…", however, the hypothesis has not been clearly presented/expressed in the previous text.
The result section presents a mix of method descriptions, normative phrases, and discussion of the results, such as (p. 11): "less surprising", "probably" etc., and references to previous research: "more consistent with previous findings…", which creates confusion for the reader. And (p.14): "If we only observe an increase…", which might belong to the discussion section. Thus, the authors could consider to be more concise as to what belongs in the results section and the discussion section, respectively.
Please elaborate more on the limitations. For instance, the actual intoxication level is not known as well as if the game took place on a weekday as opposed to a weekend, and during the day or evening. For instance if a game take place during a week day during the day, one could hypothesize that people are drinking less which would lead to less domestic violence.
 

